This remote beach in the
far south-west of England
was a major target during
the Second World War.
It was so tactically important
that the government's
Petroleum Warfare Department
installed flame throwers
all the way across it
to try and repel anyone who might try
to come ashore and
sabotage what's underneath.
Welcome to Porthcurno in Cornwall.
Under here was how Britain
talked to the world,
and to a lesser extent, how it still does.
- Under the Porthcurno Beach ran
the original telegraph cables
linking Britain with her Empire.
What you're looking at is the cable hut
which was the original
landing point for the cables
which ran from Porthcurno
all around the world.
There were 14 cables. The length of the cables
amassed about 186,000 miles.
The cables were dragged up the beach,
terminated into old valve terminations
in the cable hut
and then the message
was relayed underground
up to the cable station, which is the
building that now houses the museum.
These cables were fearsomely
expensive to make and to lay
and the last thing you needed
is some idiot dropping an anchor on them
or snagging them in their nets.
The beach has got very deep sand
and it shifts all the time,
so it's never been used for fishing,
so you don't have boats
landing here regularly,
or you didn't in 1870,
so it was a perfect place.
We also have World War II tunnels.
Back in 1939, when war was declared,
we had Britain's premier
communications hub
in a very prominent white building,
standing out on top of a cliff
in a sparsely populated area,
which wasn't the smartest idea.
So, 15,000 tonnes of granite
was blasted out from the cliff
and the whole thing was moved underground.
- A lot of folks think
that when they're sending
a message to someone in another country,
it's getting bounced up to
a satellite and back down.
But, unless you're in a really rural area,
that is not the case.
Most comm satellites
in geostationary orbit,
which means that they are falling
around the earth
at the exact same rate
that the earth is spinning below them.
But to make that orbit work,
they have to be so far away
that it takes half a second
for a signal to get beamed
up to them and back down.
The route around the surface of the earth
is much shorter and much faster
and it doesn't involve
blasting something into orbit.
Undersea cables do have
their own troubles, though.
- November 2016, Jersey pretty much
lost all its internet communication
because a boat dragged
its anchor across the seabed,
took out three high capacity
cables, leaving just one,
and Jersey was... not cut off,
but hugely reduced communications whilst
they set about repairing them.
When they laid the first cable out to
the Isles of Scilly from Porthcurno,
it was all well reported in the media
about how they were
going to get connectivity.
What wasn't reported was that
they'd actually made the cable too short.
So what they did was
they got an end of cable,
connected this dead end-of-cable
up to the landing station
and went, "Hoorah, it works!"
when it wasn't working at all
and then the media took all the photos,
they went away,
and then they put the problem right.
So, don't always believe what
you see on film.
Or YouTube!
- There are still active telecom cables
under Porthcurno beach,
although they're fibre-optic these days,
and they don't surface
at the Telegraph Museum's
old cable hut here.
They surface at industrial-looking buildings
somewhere further ashore.
One of those cables, called FLAG,
goes all the way
from under this beach here to Japan,
15,000 miles of cable stopping at a dozen
other countries along the way
and it can carry up to 100 gigabytes
of data every second.
And it's just one of many that land
somewhere in this part of Britain.
The fact that there's also
several buildings owned
by the British Intelligence Services
around here is not a coincidence.
So the next time you're in a group chat
with people all over the world
or video calling someone
on another continent,
just take a moment and remember that
somewhere near you there is a beach
with your conversation literally
flashing underneath it.